.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-only
.\" Copyright (C) 2024 Mutasem Kharma <mutasem@gspy.dev>
.\"
.TH GSPY 1 "2024-12-01" "gspy 0.1.0" "Security Tools"
.SH NAME
gspy \- forensic goroutine-to-syscall inspector for live Go processes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gspy
.I pid
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B gspy
.B \-\-version
.br
.B gspy
.B \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gspy
(goroutine spy) attaches to a running Go process and displays a live map
of goroutine IDs to kernel syscalls using eBPF uprobes and tracepoints.
.PP
It is designed for security incident response and forensic analysis of
Go-based processes. No instrumentation, no recompilation, no process
restart, and no modification of the target binary's memory or file hash
is required.
.PP
Goroutine IDs are extracted from thread-local storage by reading the
.B runtime.g
struct via
.BR process_vm_readv (2)
(never ptrace). Syscalls are intercepted using kernel tracepoints
.RB ( raw_syscalls/sys_enter
and
.BR raw_syscalls/sys_exit ).
Goroutine context switches are tracked via uprobes on
.BR runtime.execute .
.PP
Events are collected via a BPF ring buffer and displayed in a terminal
user interface (TUI) with 1 Hz refresh rate, or emitted as
newline-delimited JSON for pipeline processing.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-top
Sort by syscall frequency (default).
.TP
.B \-\-latency
Sort by highest current syscall latency.
.TP
.BI \-\-filter " mode"
Filter displayed syscalls by category.
.I mode
can be one of:
.BR all " (default),"
.BR io " (read, write, open, etc.),"
.BR net " (socket, connect, accept, etc.),"
.BR sched " (futex, nanosleep, sched_yield, etc.)."
.TP
.B \-\-readonly
Forensic mode. Computes and displays the SHA-256 hash of the target
binary on attach. Guarantees zero writes to target process memory.
Logs "READONLY MODE" to stderr.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit one JSON object per line per syscall event to stdout. No TUI.
Signal-safe and pipeable.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Print BPF verifier log and map statistics to stderr on startup.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage information and exit.
.SH FORENSIC MODE
When
.B \-\-readonly
is specified, gspy operates in forensic mode:
.IP \(bu 2
Computes and logs the SHA-256 hash of the target binary on attach.
.IP \(bu 2
Guarantees zero writes to target process memory. gspy only uses
.BR process_vm_readv (2),
which is a read-only system call.
.IP \(bu 2
The SHA-256 hash is displayed in the TUI header and included in JSON output.
.IP \(bu 2
Logs "READONLY MODE: no writes to target process memory" to stderr.
.PP
This mode is designed for chain-of-custody scenarios where the target
binary's integrity must be preserved and verifiable.
.SH GOROUTINE ID EXTRACTION
gspy extracts goroutine IDs by:
.IP 1. 4
Attaching a uprobe to
.B runtime.execute
in the target Go binary.
.IP 2.
Reading the goroutine pointer from the RAX register
(Go 1.17+ ABIInternal on amd64, where the first argument is passed in RAX).
.IP 3.
Using
.BR bpf_probe_read_user ()
to read the
.B goid
field from the
.B runtime.g
struct at a version-specific offset.
.IP 4.
Maintaining a TID \(-> GID map in a BPF hash table.
.PP
The goid offset is determined by:
.IP 1. 4
DWARF debug information in the target binary (most accurate).
.IP 2.
A hardcoded offset table verified against Go runtime source code
for Go 1.17 through 1.23 on amd64.
.IP 3.
A fallback default of 152 bytes with a logged warning.
.SH SUPPORTED GO VERSIONS
Go 1.17 through 1.23 on amd64 (verified).
.PP
arm64 is experimental \(em goid offsets are unverified and may be incorrect.
Other architectures are unsupported.
.SH KERNEL REQUIREMENTS
.IP \(bu 2
Linux kernel >= 5.8 (required for BPF ring buffer support).
.IP \(bu 2
.B CONFIG_BPF_SYSCALL=y
(enabled in all major distributions).
.IP \(bu 2
.B CONFIG_DEBUG_INFO_BTF=y
recommended for CO-RE portability.
.IP \(bu 2
.B perf_event_paranoid
<= 2 recommended. If higher, gspy warns but attempts to continue.
.SH CAPABILITIES
gspy requires one of:
.IP \(bu 2
.B CAP_BPF
+
.B CAP_PERFMON
(preferred, Linux 5.8+).
.IP \(bu 2
.B CAP_SYS_ADMIN
(fallback for older configurations).
.PP
To grant capabilities without running as root:
.PP
.RS
sudo setcap cap_bpf,cap_perfmon+ep $(which gspy)
.RE
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit, or target process exited cleanly.
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error (missing capabilities, invalid PID, BPF load failure).
.TP
.B 2
Kernel version too old (< 5.8).
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by SIGINT (Ctrl-C).
.SH KNOWN LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
arm64 goid offsets are unverified and may produce incorrect goroutine IDs.
.IP \(bu 2
Go generics may produce inlined frames that resolve incorrectly.
.IP \(bu 2
Processes with ASLR and no DWARF info may have partial frame resolution.
.IP \(bu 2
cgroupv1 namespaces are unsupported.
.IP \(bu 2
Kernel < 5.8 is not supported; gspy exits with exit code 2.
.IP \(bu 2
Stripped binaries (no symbol table) display raw hex addresses instead of
function names.
.SH EXAMPLES
Basic attach to a running Go process:
.PP
.RS
sudo gspy 1234
.RE
.PP
Forensic readonly mode with network filter:
.PP
.RS
sudo gspy 1234 \-\-readonly \-\-filter net
.RE
.PP
JSON pipeline \(em find syscalls with latency > 1ms:
.PP
.RS
sudo gspy 1234 \-\-json | jq 'select(.latency_us > 1000)'
.RE
.PP
Sort by latency to find blocked goroutines:
.PP
.RS
sudo gspy 1234 \-\-latency
.RE
.PP
Debug BPF loading issues:
.PP
.RS
sudo gspy 1234 \-\-debug
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bpf (2),
.BR process_vm_readv (2),
.BR bpftool (8),
.BR dlv (1),
.BR strace (1),
.BR perf (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Mutasem Kharma <mutasem@gspy.dev>
.SH LICENSE
GPL-2.0-only
.PP
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
